---
layout: default
title: "Requs Syntax"
date: 2014-05-01
description:
  Requs is a controlled natural language (CNL) for
  software requirements specification
categories: blog
---

The scope definition document consists of *types*
and *methods* (aka "use cases"). For example, there are two types
(`Visitor` and `Image`) and one
use case (`UC3.2`) defined in the snippet:

{% highlight requs hello %}
Visitor is "an originator of HTTP request".
UC3.2 where User (a user) deletes photos:
  "we will define it later...".
Image includes: content, name, and size.
{% endhighlight %}

Anything inside double quotes is considered as
informal content, which we take "as is", without
any attempt to understand what it means. You can double quote anything
(except double quotes, of course), and you can place
informal texts in any place of the document. They are ignored
during formal Requs analysis.

Let's consider a bigger example of a type `Image`:

{% highlight requs %}
Image includes:
content as File "a binary content as defined by ISO-15948",
name as "a unique alpha-numeric name of the image",
size as "the total number of bytes in PNG content".
{% endhighlight %}

The semantic is the same -- the type still contains three *slots*
(`PNG content`, `name` and `size`). However
in this example we added an informal explanation to every one of them.
An `as` keyword separates the name of the slot and its invariant.

Pay attention to the dots, colons, semicolons and commas used above.
Comma, semicolon and preposition `and` can replace each other.
For example, the following declarations are semantically equivalent:

{% highlight requs %}
Image needs: content and name and size.
Image needs: content, name, size.
Image needs: content; name; and size.
{% endhighlight %}

By means of `is`/`is a` we enable a declaration of *invariants*
on types. Invariant is a *predicate*, which is always true, no matter
what happens with the system. In the example above it is always true
that `PNG content` is a file with binary content (not a readable
ASCII text). Nobody can break this invariant and put a textual information
into this slot.

As you noticed, an invariant can be declared with an informal text, as we've
done with `size`. Such a declaration means
absolutely nothing and will be ignored. But it helps when you're starting
to develop the SRS document.

In general, *informal texts* play an important role during the initial
development of a requirements document and
during a preliminary system analysis. When you don't know for sure
how to define the information you have in a strict format -- you
should use informal texts. Later, when you have more information,
you will replace them.

Requs is a case-insensitive language in all places
except one -- type names should use
[CamelCase Notation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase). Thus,
`Fie`, `ImageFile`, and `VeryBigImageFile` are valid type
names, while `imagefile` is just an English word.

## Bigger Example

To put things together we should declare a use case, which is
a step-by-step explanation of interaction between instances of types
(so called *objects*), for example:

{% highlight requs %}
UC8.1 where User (a user) shares Image with User (a friend):
1. The user creates Image (a photo);
2. The user updates the friend "selecting one of his contacts";
3. The photo converts "to the right PNG format, 600x600 maximum";
4. The friend receives email using SmtpServer (a server);
5. The friend reads the photo "in his own web page".
UC8.1/1 when "the user exceeds the maximum possible number of photos":
1. Fail since "photos limit exceeded".
UC8.1/3 when "invalid format":
1. "We notify user about the problem";
2. Fail since "can't convert photo".
{% endhighlight %}

First line in this example is a declaration of a use case,
which number is `UC8.1`. The use case has a *signature*,
which differentiates it from all other use cases. It is not the
ID of the use case, but the signature, which is important. This
concept is very similar to
[function signature](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signature_(computer_science))
in programming. The signature of this use case is:

{% highlight requs %}
User shares Image with User
{% endhighlight %}

In order to include this use case into another one we should use this
signature, filling it with particular objects. Objects start with
article `the`. On their first occurrence they appear in round brackets
and start with `a` or `an`.

In our use case there are three objects: `the user`,
`the friend` and `the photo`. An object could be
either received by a use case or created inside it. However, there is no grammar
difference between objects received and objects created. We assume
that an object is empty until anyone updates or creates it (more on this later).

There are seven *main flows* in this use case, and five *alternative
flows*. Flows `1`, `5`, `6`, and `7`
instruct us to include other use cases that match the signatures
provided and pass them the objects we have.

## USING

In the example above, one of the use case steps
mentioned `using` operator:

{% highlight requs %}
The friend receives email using SmtpServer (a server).
{% endhighlight %}

This is similar to sending arguments to a method. In this line
we're calling a method "receives" on "the friend" object like this:

{% highlight java %}
friend.receives_email(smtp_server);
{% endhighlight %}

Instead of `using` you can use `of` or `with`. These three
keywords are reserved and can't be used as English words.

## CRUD

There are four use cases that are included by `UC8.1`.
They have to be defined somewhere else in the document,
otherwise the document will be semantically incomplete. But not all four are
mandatory, because there is a number of *elementary use cases*,
which are defined in the system, even if the document is
empty. The elementary use cases are
([CRUD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) requirements pattern):

{% highlight requs %}
Something creates something
Something reads something
Something updates something
Something deletes something
{% endhighlight %}

As you understand, `something` means "object of any type".
`create` means making/instantiating of a new object.
`read` means reading of all and any slots of an object, and all their slots, etc.
`update` means changing of values of slots of an object.
`delete` means removing an object from a persistent storage.

Thus, a valid flow either points us to another use case
defined somewhere else in the document, or points us to
an elementary use case, or points us nowhere with an informal text
(*informal flow*).

## Exceptions

Besides that, a flow might have a special instruction, which we've seen
in alternative flow `UC8.3/1` and `UC8.3/3`. `fail since`
means that a use case should be stopped at this point and the
reason of this termination is explained right after the word `since`
as an informal text.

Reason of failure is used by a parent use case, which included the
current one. This is exactly what happens in `UC8.3/3`. We are
waiting for a failure from `we convert the photo`, and
we're ready to accept a failure called `invalid format`.
This approach is very similar to
[exception handling paradigm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exception_handling)
in object-oriented languages.

## Scope Ambiguity

There is only one metric that tells us everything about
the entire scope definition document. The metric is called
"*scope ambiguity*" and is calculated like:

{% highlight text %}
A = S / (S + M)
{% endhighlight %}

`S` stands for a total number of all informal flows,
and `M` is a total number of CRUD-manipulators.
Thus, if `A` equals to 0, the document is absolutely non-ambiguous,
which is an almost impossible situation. In real world projects
the task of a system analyst is to move `A` from 1 to 0.

## Arity of Slots

A slot may have an "arity", determined by a suffix attached to its name. There
are four possible options:

{% highlight requs %}
User includes: name, address-s, and photo-s?.
{% endhighlight %}

`-s` means "one or many" or `1..*` in UML.

`-s?` means "zero or many" or `0..*` in UML.

No suffix means exactly one, or `1` in UML.

## Composition vs Aggregation

A slot without a type means composition. A slot with a type
means aggregation. In order to make a slot with a type of
composition nature, you should use an exclamation mark after
the type:

{% highlight requs %}
User includes: photo-s? as File!.
{% endhighlight %}

## Actors

Any type can be an actor, just say so in your spec:

{% highlight requs %}
User is an actor.
{% endhighlight %}

Only actors can perform `read` operations.

## Attributes

Any use case may have attributes assigned to it. Attributes
may be used, for example, for
[requirements prioritization](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Requirement_prioritization).

{% highlight requs %}
:UC3.2 is a must.
:UC8 is delivered.
:UC2 is specified.
{% endhighlight %}

You can "seal" your statement with a hash code:

{% highlight requs %}
af63e2:UC3.2 is a must.
{% endhighlight %}

This hash code `af63e2` is calculated from the content of `UC3.2`.
If the content is changed, this statement becomes invalid and the entire
document can't be compiled any more.

More about it in [Attributes and Seals]({% post_url 2014/may/2014-05-10-feature-attributes %}).

## Non-Functional Requirements

To any use case you can add a number of non-functional requirements (NFR),
in the following format:

{% highlight requs %}
UC3.2/MTBF must "be 5 minutes on a standard equipment".
UC7/PERF must "be less than 500 msec per request".
{% endhighlight %}

After the name of the use case you put a forward slash and then
a mnemonic name of a non-functional requirement. Then, you put
"must be" and an informal text.

More about it in [Non-Functional Requirements]({% post_url 2014/may/2014-05-15-feature-nfrs %}).

## Markdown Pages

Sometimes you may need to add informal pages to your SRS document. For
example, Vision, Business Case, wireframes, UI mockups, tables,
research results, supplementary tables, etc. The syntax is simple:

{% highlight requs %}
Vision: """
Any text you wish, in Markdown format.
""".
{% endhighlight %}

Page name should be in CamelCase, as well as type name.

Read on [Markdown syntax](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax).
